Validator monitoring (#2925)
status-im/nim-beacon-chain: docs/the_nimbus_book/src/validator-monitor.md

# Validator monitoring

> The validator monitoring feature allows tracking the life-cycle and performance of one or more validators in detail. Monitoring can be done for any validator with slightly more detail for validators that are running through the same beacon node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The validator monitoring feature allows for tracking the life-cycle and performance of one or more validators in detail. Monitoring can be carried out for any validator, with slightly more detail for validators that are running through the same beacon node.
```

> Every time the validator performs an duty, the duty is recorded and the monitor will keep track of events related to getting rewarded for having performed it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every time the validator performs a duty, the duty is recorded and the monitor keeps track of the reward-related events for having performed it. For example:
```

> * When attesting, the attestation being added to an aggregate, then block, then being given a reward in the state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When attesting, the attestation is added to an aggregate, then a block, before a reward is applied to the state
```

* When performing sync committee duties, likewise

> Validator actions can be traced either through logging, or comprehensive metrics that allow creating alerts in monitoring tools. The metrics are based on the same feature in [Lighthouse](https://lighthouse-book.sigmaprime.io/validator-monitoring.html), thus dashboards and alerts can be used with either client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validator actions can be traced either through logging, or comprehensive metrics that allow for creating alerts in monitoring tools. The metrics are based on the same feature in [Lighthouse](https://lighthouse-book.sigmaprime.io/validator-monitoring.html), thus dashboards and alerts can be used with either client.
```

The monitor can be enabled either for all keys that are used with a particular beacon node, or for a specific list of validators, or both.

```
# Enable automatic monitoring of all validators used with this beacon node
./run-mainnet-beacon-node.sh --validator-monitor-auto

# Enable monitoring of one or more specific validators
./run-mainnet-beacon-node.sh \
  --validator-monitor-pubkey=0xa1d1ad0714035353258038e964ae9675dc0252ee22cea896825c01458e1807bfad2f9969338798548d9858a571f7425c \
  --validator-monitor-pubkey=0xb2ff4716ed345b05dd1dfc6a5a9fa70856d8c75dcc9e881dd2f766d5f891326f0d10e96f3a444ce6c912b69c22c6754d

# Publish metrics as totals for all monitored validators instead of each validator separately - used for limiting the load on metrics when monitoring many validators
./run-mainnet-beacon-node.sh --validator-monitor-totals
```

## Understanding monitoring

When a validator performs a duty, such as signing an attestation or a sync committee message, this is broadcast to the network. Other nodes pick it up and package the message into an aggregate and later a block. The block is included in the canonical chain and a reward is given two epochs (~13 minutes) later.

> The monitor tracks these actions and will log each step at the INF level. If any step is missed, a NOT log is shown instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The monitor tracks these actions and will log each step at the `INF` level. If any step is missed, a `NOT` log is shown instead.
```

> A typical lifecycle of an attestation might look something like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The typical lifecycle of an attestation might look something like the following:
```

INF 2021-11-22 11:32:51.293+01:00 Attestation included in aggregate          topics="val_mon" aggregate="(aggregation_bits: 0b1111111101011111001101111111101100111111110100111011111110110101110111111010111111011101111011101111111111101111100001111111100111, data: (slot: 2656363, index: 11, beacon_block_root: \"bbe7fc25\", source: \"83010:a8a1b125\", target: \"83011:6db281cd\"), signature: \"8576b3fc\")" src=gossip epoch=83011 validator=b93c290b
INF 2021-11-22 11:33:07.193+01:00 Attestation included in block              attestation_data="(slot: 2656364, index: 9, beacon_block_root: \"c7761767\", source: \"83010:a8a1b125\", target: \"83011:6db281cd\")" block_slot=2656365 inclusion_lag_slots=0 epoch=83011 validator=b65b6e1b
```

The lifecycle of a particular message can be traced by following the `epoch=.... validator=...` fields in the message.

> Failures at any point are recorder at a higher logging level, such as `NOT`(ice):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Failures at any point are recorded at a higher logging level, such as `NOT`(ice):
```

```
NOT 2021-11-17 20:53:42.108+01:00 Attestation failed to match head           topics="chaindag" epoch=81972 validator=...
```

> :warning: It should be noted that metrics are tracked for the current history - in the case of a reorg on the chain - in particular a deep reorg - no attempt is made to revisit previously reported values. In the case that finality is delayed, the risk of stale metrics increases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> :warning: It should be noted that metrics are tracked for the current history - in the case of a reorg on the chain - in particular a deep reorg - no attempt is made to revisit previously reported values. In the case that finality is delayed, the risk of stale metrics increases.
```

> Likewise, many metrics, such as aggregation includion, reflect conditions on the network - it may happen that the same message is counted more than once under certain conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Likewise, many metrics, such as aggregation inclusion, reflect conditions on the network - it may happen that the same message is counted more than once under certain conditions.
```
